.. _arch-center-is-text-to-audio:

================================================
Text-To-Audio News Conversion With Generative AI
================================================

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: tutorial

.. meta::
   :keywords: media, videos, news, gen AI 
   :description: Automate news broadcasting combining generative AI with MongoDB.
   
.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 1
   :class: singlecol

Combine generative AI for podcast creation and MongoDB for data storage
to automate and scale news broadcasting.

**Use cases:** `Gen AI
<https://www.mongodb.com/use-cases/artificial-intelligence>`__

**Industries:** Media

**Products:** `MongoDB Atlas <http://mongodb.com/atlas>`__, 
`MongoDB Aggregation Framework
<https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/core/aggregation-pipeline/>`__,
`MongoDB Atlas Vector Search
<https://www.mongodb.com/products/platform/atlas-vector-search>`__

**Partners:** `Google NotebookLM <https://notebooklm.google/>`__

Solution Overview
-----------------

The surge in audio content demand like podcasts, with `9 million new
listeners in the U.S. alone
<https://advertise.acast.com/news-and-insights/future-of-podcast-advertising-in-2025-industry-leaders-predictions>`__,
has prompted news organizations to seek efficient ways to deliver daily
summaries. Automating this process remains challenging, requiring
managing dynamic articles data to convert it into high-quality audio
experiences. 

With MongoDB and generative AI, you can build a news automation solution
to streamline and scale podcast creation. MongoDB serves as the core
data layer for the system, efficiently managing news articles as
flexible, schema-less documents within a single collection. These
documents capture both static information—such as title, content, and
publication date—and dynamic metrics, like the number of qualified
reads, that monitor article performance and popularity over time.
Moreover, derived insights, such as sentiment analysis and key entities,
can be enriched through a generative AI pipeline and added to the same
collection for analysis.

This adaptable structure ensures efficiency and scalability, providing a
robust framework to query and extract the latest news and metadata. By
integrating advanced language models, this information can be further
transformed into audio podcasts. With this foundation in place, you
unlock new AI-driven business opportunities, attract new customers and
increase revenue streams.

Reference Architectures
-----------------------

To implement this framework, you'll need MongoDB for data storage and
AI-powered speech synthesis for audio creation. You can use Google’s
NotebookLM model to refine news text with accurate intonation and
pacing. The steps below outline the workflow for converting news
summaries into audio:

.. figure:: /includes/images/industry-solutions/text-to-audio-architecture.svg
   :figwidth: 1200px
   :alt: visualization for the network chatbot
   
   Figure 1. AI-based text-to-audio conversion architecture

- **Retrieve Articles:** Use the `Aggregation Framework
  <https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/aggregation/>`__ and `Vector
  Search
  <https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/atlas-vector-search/vector-search-overview/>`__,
  to fetch relevant news articles from the database.

- **Generate Podcast Script:** Pass the articles through an AI pipeline to
  create a structured, multi-voice podcast script.

- **Convert to Audio:** Use advanced text-to-speech models to transform the
  script into high-quality audio, stored as a .wav file.

- **Optimize Delivery:** Cache the generated podcast to ensure seamless,
  on-demand playback for users.

This framework delivers high-quality, human-like narration in MP3
format, providing users with a professional and engaging listening
experience.

Build the Solution
------------------

This solution is part of the larger ist.media project. You can use this
framework as inspiration for building your own customized text-to-audio
solution. To do so, follow these steps:

.. procedure::
   :style: normal

   .. step:: Deploy the ist.media demo

      Clone the `ist.media github repository
      <https://github.com/mongodb-industry-solutions/ist.media/tree/main>`__
      and follow the Readme instructions to deploy the demo. 

   .. step:: Create a feed for news

      Run the demo and verify that the /feed endpoint provides the news
      feed for the current day. Alternatively, you can supply your own
      data—served statically by the endpoint in the same format—if you
      prefer to skip the initial news collection mechanisms used by
      ist.media.

   .. step:: Generate text-to-audio conversion

      Run the `podcast.py
      <https://github.com/mongodb-industry-solutions/ist.media/blob/main/scripts/podcast.py>`__
      file in the ist.media demo. This script uses the notebooklm.google
      API to generate the podcast, downloads it from storage, and saves
      it with the date in the filename (day/month/year).

Key Learnings
-------------

Building a news automation solution that transforms data into engaging
audio content requires systems designed for flexibility, speed,
scalability, and adaptability. Below are the key insights that make this
approach successful:

- **The document model handles diverse attributes:** News data combines
  various attributes, including static fields (e.g., ID, title, body,
  date, image URL), dynamic metadata (e.g., read count), AI-generated
  insights (e.g., keywords, sentiment), and embeddings for semantic
  search. The document model supports all these elements, removing
  database limitations and allowing the system to evolve smoothly.

- **Speed drives efficiency:** By processing complete, self-contained
  documents, the system avoids complex operations, enabling faster
  enrichment, analysis, and transformation of articles into audio
  content in near real-time.

- **Scalability ensures reliable growth and performance:** Whether managing
  small updates or processing large volumes of dynamic data, a scalable
  system maintains high availability and supports seamless expansion,
  making it ideal for handling the demands of large-scale media
  applications.

- **Flexibility empowers developers:** Without rigid schemas, new data points
  like AI insights, audience metrics, or editorial updates can be
  integrated seamlessly, allowing experimentation, scaling, and
  adaptation to evolving news consumption.

Authors
-------

- Benjamin Lorenz, MongoDB
- Diego Canales, MongoDB

Learn More
----------

- :ref:`arch-center-is-ai-media-personalization`

- :ref:`arch-center-is-Gen-AI-powered-video-summarization-solution`

- :ref:`arch-center-is-telco-ops`